Option to track build configuration for changes between builds (#34713)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/config-reference.adoc

Setting `quarkus.config-tracking.enabled` to `true` will enable a configuration interceptor that will record every configuration option that was read during the build process along with their values. The resulting report will be stored in `${project.basedir}/.quarkus/quarkus-prod-config-dump` by default. The target file could be configured using the following options:

* `quarkus.config-tracking.directory` - directory in which the configuration dump should be stored, the default is `${project.basedir}/.quarkus`
* `quarkus.config-tracking.file-prefix` - file name prefix, the default value is `quarkus`
* `quarkus.config-tracking.file-suffix` - file name suffix, the default value is `-config-dump`
* `quarkus.config-tracking.file` - path to a file in which the configuration dump should be stored. This option will make the rest of the above irrelevant unless the file path is a relative path, in which case it will related to the value of `quarkus.config-tracking.directory`.

The `prod` part of the `quarkus-prod-config-dump` file name refers to the Quarkus build mode, indicating that the dump was taken for the production build.

> The reason `${project.basedir}/.quarkus` directory was chosen as the default location was to make it easy to track build time configuration changes between builds and use that as an indicator to build output caching tools (such as https://maven.apache.org/extensions/maven-build-cache-extension/[Apache Maven Build Cache] and https://gradle.com/gradle-enterprise-solutions/build-cache/[Gradle Enterprise Build Cache]) whether the application binary has to be re-built.

Reviewer: Not sure if that answers your question but the current implementation of the Maven extension is adding [the compilation classpath as input to the Quarkus `build` goal](https://github.com/jprinet/quarkus-maven-sample/blob/86eaf8ad12ffba34a6d5fa3f2e1d8c804f73b035/quarkus-custom-user-data-maven-extension/src/main/java/com/gradle/QuarkusCachingConfig.java#L168)

> The reason `${project.basedir}/.quarkus` directory was chosen as the default location was to make it easy to track build time configuration changes between builds and use that as an indicator to build output caching tools (such as https://maven.apache.org/extensions/maven-build-cache-extension/[Apache Maven Build Cache] and https://gradle.com/gradle-enterprise-solutions/build-cache/[Gradle Enterprise Build Cache]) whether the application binary has to be re-built.

Author: As @jprinet wrote, for now this is based on the assumption that other inputs (dependencies included) are checked by the build outcome caching tools.

Configuration values can be hashed using `SHA-512` algorithm before they are written to a file. Configuration option names whose values should be hashed can be configured in `quarkus.config-tracking.hash-options` as a comma separated list.

=== Tracking build time configuration changes between builds

While `quarkus.config-tracking.enabled` enables effective build time configuration report generation, there is also a way to check whether the values stored in that report have changed before the next build of the project is launched.

Maven projects could add the following goal to their `quarkus-maven-plugin` configuration:
[source,xml]
----
      <plugin>
        <groupId>${quarkus.platform.group-id}</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-maven-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>${quarkus.platform.version}</version>
        <extensions>true</extensions>
        <executions>
          <execution>
            <id>track-prod-config-changes</id>
            <phase>process-resources</phase>
            <goals>
              <goal>track-config-changes</goal>
            </goals>
          </execution>
          <!-- other executions would follow below -->
----

> The `track-config-canges` would be looking for `${project.basedir}/.quarkus/quarkus-prod-config-dump` by default (the file name and location could be configured) and if found, it will check whether the values stored in the config dump have now changed. It will log those options that have changed and save the current values of each of the options present in `${project.basedir}/.quarkus/quarkus-prod-config-dump` in `${project.basedir}/target/quarkus-prod-config.check` (the target file name and location can be configured). If the build time configuration has not changed since the last build both `${project.basedir}/.quarkus/quarkus-prod-config-dump` and `${project.basedir}/.quarkus/quarkus-prod-config-dump` should end up being identical.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `track-config-changes` goal looks for `${project.basedir}/.quarkus/quarkus-prod-config-dump` (file name and directory are configurable) and, if the file already exists, checks whether the values stored in the config dump have changed.
It will log the changed options and save the current values of each of the options present in `${project.basedir}/.quarkus/quarkus-prod-config-dump` in `${project.basedir}/target/quarkus-prod-config.check` (the target file name and location can be configured). If the build time configuration has not changed since the last build both `${project.basedir}/.quarkus/quarkus-prod-config-dump` and `${project.basedir}/.quarkus/quarkus-prod-config-dump` will be identical.
```
